In the last few videos,
we introduced TD and discussed
its advantages over Dynamic
Programming and Monte Carlo.
In this video, we will dive
deeper and compare TD and
Monte Carlo in
a carefully constructed
scientific experiment.
By the end of this video,
you'll be able to: identify
the empirical benefits
of TD Learning.
Consider this simple NDP.
We have five non-terminal states.
In each state, we have
two deterministic actions,
left and right.
Let's evaluate
the uniform random policy.
We want to estimate
its value function.
All episodes start in state C,
episodes terminate either on
the left or on the right.
The reward is zero on
all transitions except plus
one for terminating on the right.
Let's set the discount
factor to be one.
In this problem, the value
has an intuitive meaning.
The value of each state
is the probability
terminating on the right when
starting from each state.
The value of the start
state is 0.5,
that means the probability
of terminating
from the center is a half.
Randomly wandering
from the center has
a 50-50 chance of terminating
on either side. That makes sense.
Let's label the rest of
the states with their values.
Let's run an
experiment right now.
We have labeled the NDP with
the true values at
the top of the slide.
The agent, our cute little robot
estimates the value
function using TD.
At the bottom, we have
a Monte Carlo agent.
Let's initialize
the approximate value function
for both agents to 0.5.
Let's look at the performance of
both agents during
the first episode.
Notice, the TD agent
only updated the value
of state E. To understand this,
consider the transition
from state C to
D. The TD error is
equal to the reward on
the transition plus
the value of the next
state D minus the value of
state C. The reward is
zero because this is
a non-terminal transition.
The values of C and
D are both 0.5.
So the TDR is zero and we make
no change to the estimate for
C. The same thing happens
on every step except
the transition into
this terminal state from
state E. In contrast,
Monte Carlo updated the values of
all the states the robot
saw during the episode.
Let's look at the next episode.
Pay attention to how the values
are updated during the episode.
Eventually, the TD agent makes
updates to the values
on every step.
In contrast, the Monte
Carlo agent waited
until the end of the episode
before it made its updates.
Let's look at
a few more episodes.
The value estimates
of the TD agent
seemed to be moving
towards the true values.
This is taking too long.
Let's jump ahead and evaluate
the asymptotic performance.
Let's plot the estimated values
at several points
during learning.
The x-axis represents
each state in the NDP.
On the y-axis, we have
the estimated value.
Here are the true values.
Lets also plot
the initial value estimates.
Recall, we initialize
them to 0.5.
The red curve shows the values
learned after the first episode.
By the end of the first episode,
TD only updated the value of
a single state as we discussed.
The estimates after
a 100 episodes
are about as good as
they're ever going to get.
Remember, we're using
a constant step size of 0.1.
This means the values
will fluctuate in
response to the outcomes of
the most recent episodes.
If you use a smaller
learning rate or
better yet a decaying
learning rate,
we might get a better estimate.
A natural next question is,
does TD learn faster
than Monte Carlo?
Let's compare
the performance of TD and
Monte Carlo on
our example problem.
Here, the x-axis represents
the number of episodes.
The y-axis represents
the root mean
squared error between
the value function
and the learned estimates.
The red learning curves
represent the performance of
Monte Carlo for
several values of Alpha.
Each curve is averaged over
a 100 independent runs.
For instance, this point
represents the average
error achieve after
50 episodes for the
learning rate 0.01.
Now, let's look at
TD's performance.
We see that TD perform
consistently better
than Monte Carlo.
Let's look a little more closely.
Notice, the error reduces
faster with a learning
rate of 0.15,
but ultimately, results
in higher final error.
With a smaller learning rate,
TD learns more slowly but
achieves lower final error.
In summary, we ran
a careful experiment
comparing TD and Monte Carlo,
and the results suggest
that TD converges faster to
a lower final error in
this problem. See you next time.